Dynamic programming algorithms
are obtained by
turning the Bellman equations
into update rules.
In this video, we will
introduce the first of
these algorithms called
iterative policy evaluation.
By the end of this video,
you will be able to outline
the iterative policy
evaluation algorithm
for estimating state
values for a given policy,
and apply iterative
policy evaluation
to compute value functions.
Remember the Bellman
equation gives us
a recursive expression for V Pi.
The idea of iterative
policy evaluation is so
simple that at first it
might seem a bit silly.
We take the Bellman equation and
directly use it as
an update rule.
Now, instead of an equation which
holds for the true
value function,
we have a procedure
we can apply to
iteratively refine our estimate
of the value function.
This will produce a sequence of
better and better approximations
to the value function.
Let's see visually how
this procedure works.
We begin with an
arbitrary initialization
for our approximate
value function,
let's call this v_0.
Each iteration then produces
a better approximation by using
the update rule shown at
the top of the slide.
Each iteration applies this
updates to every state,
S, in the state space,
which we call a sweep.
Applying this update
repeatedly leads to
a better and better approximation
to the state value function v Pi.
If this update leaves the
value function approximation
unchanged, that is,
if v_k plus 1 equals
v_k for all states,
then v_k equals v Pi,
and we have found
the value function.
This is because v Pi is
the unique solution to
the Bellman equation.
The only way the update
could leave v_k
unchanged is if v_k already
obeys the Bellman equation.
In fact, it can be proven
that for any choice of v_0,
v_k will converge to v Pi
in the limit as k
approaches infinity.
To implement iterative
policy evaluation,
we store two arrays,
each has one entry
for every state.
One array, which we label
V stores the current
approximate value function.
Another array, V prime,
stores the updated values.
By using two arrays,
we can compute the new values
from the old one state at
a time without the old values
being changed in the process.
At the end of a full sweep,
we can write all the
new values into V;
then we do the next iteration.
It is also possible to implement
a version with only one array,
in which case, some updates will
themselves use new values
instead of old.
This single array version is
still guaranteed to converge,
and in fact, will
usually converge faster.
This is because it gets to use
the updated values sooner.
But for simplicity, we focus
on the two array version.
Let's look at how iterative
policy evaluation
works on a particular example.
Consider the four-by-four
grid world shown here.
This is an episodic MDP
with the terminal state
located in the top left
and bottom right corners.
The terminal state is
shown in two places,
but formally it is
the same state.
The reward will be minus
one for every transition.
Since the problem is episodic,
let's consider the undiscounted
case of gamma equals 1.
There are four possible actions
in each state up,
down, left, and right.
Each action is deterministic.
If the action would move
the agent off the grid,
it instead leaves the agent
in the same state.
Now, let's evaluate
the uniform random policy,
which selects each of the four
actions one-quarter of the time.
The value function represents
the expected number of steps
until termination
from a given state.
The order we sweep through
the states is not important
since we are using the two
array version of the algorithm.
Let's assume we sweep
the states first
from left to right,
and then from top to bottom.
We never update the value of
the terminal state as it
is defined to be zero.
We initialize all the
values in V to zero.
The initial value stored in
V prime are relevant since
they'll always be updated
before they are used.
We can now begin
our first iteration
with the update to state one.
To compute the update,
we have to sum over all actions.
Consider the left action first,
which has probability one-quarter
under the uniform random policy.
The dynamics function, P,
is deterministic here
so only the reward and
value for a 1S prime
contributes to the sum.
The sum includes minus
one for the reward,
and zero for the value
of the terminal state.
Since we initialized all
state values to zero,
and the reward for
each transition is
minus one the computation for
all the other actions
will look much the same.
The result is that V prime of
state one is set to minus one.
Next, we move to state two.
We first evaluate the term in
the sum for the left action.
Again the action probability
is one-quarter,
and in this case,
the next state is state one.
Although we have updated the
value of state one already,
the version of the algorithm
we are running we'll
use the old value stored in
V. So the value
for state one in
the update is still zero.
Again, all the other actions
will look much the same.
The result is that
V prime of state
two is also set to minus one.
In fact, since every state value
is initialized to zero,
every state's value will
be set to minus one.
After completing this full sweep,
we copy the updated
values from V prime
to V. This has been
only one sweep.
Let's discuss now
the full algorithm
for iterative policy evaluation.
Take any policy we
want to evaluate,
initialize two arrays V
and V prime.
We can initialize
these however we like,
but let's set them to zero.
We just saw how one sweep of
iterative policy
evaluation works.
Let's look at how we
compute multiple sweeps,
and determine how
the algorithm stops.
The outer loop continues
until the change in
the approximate value
function becomes small.
We track the largest update to
this state value in
a given iteration.
Let's call this delta.
The outer loop terminates
when this maximum change is
less than some user-specified
constant called theta.
As discussed before, once
the approximate value function
stops changing,
we have converged to V Pi.
Similarly, once the change in
the approximate value
function is very small,
this means we are close to V Pi.
Let's pick up where we left
off in our grid world example.
We had just completed
our first sweep.
Let's use our value of
0.001 for the stopping
parameter theta.
The smaller the value we choose,
the more accurate our final
value estimate will be.
We've already completed
one iteration,
and the maximum change
in value was 1.0.
Since this is greater than 0.001,
we carry on to
the next iteration.
After the second sweep,
notice how the terminal
state starts to
influence the value of
the nearest states first.
Let's run one more sweep.
We see that now the influence of
the terminal state has
propagated further.
Let's run a few more sweeps
to see what happens.
We can start to see how
the value of each state
is related to its proximity
to the terminal state.
Let's keep running
until our maximum delta
is less than theta.
Here is the result we
eventually arrive at,
our approximate value
function has converged to
the value function for the
random policy, and we're done.
That's it for this video.
You should now understand how
we can turn the Bellman equation
into an update rule to
iteratively compute
value functions.
Soon, you'll see how
these ideas can also be
used for policy improvement.
See you next time.